[mkdocs] feat: add monitoring status tutorial (#1737)
symbol/symbol: mkdocs/pages/en/devbook/transactions/monitoring-status.md

Common reasons include insufficient balance, invalid <signature:|signatures>, or deadline expiration.
Failed transactions are rejected during validation and will not be included in a block.

See [TransactionStatusEnum](../reference/rest/symbol.md#model-TransactionStatusEnum) for all possible codes.

### Handling Unknown Status

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:68:75', 'js:71:80']) }}

If the endpoint returns HTTP 404, the transaction status is not yet available.
This can happen immediately after announcing a transaction, before the <node:> processes it, or if the hash is invalid.
The function handles this case by logging the attempt and continuing to poll.

For any other error (such as connectivity issues or failed transactions), the function re-raises the exception immediately.

### Waiting Between Attempts

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:77:79', 'js:82:87']) }}

Between polling attempts, the function waits for a configurable delay (default: 2 seconds).
This prevents overwhelming the <node:> with requests and allows time for network processing.

### Handling Timeouts

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:81:82', 'js:90:95']) }}

> If the transaction is not confirmed after the specified attempts, the function raises a `RuntimeError` explaining the problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the transaction is not confirmed after the specified number of attempts, the function raises a `RuntimeError` explaining the problem.
```

And I know this was _my_ suggestion 😅

## Conclusion

This tutorial showed how to:

| Step                                                                           | Related documentation                   |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------- |
| [Find the transaction hash](#finding-the-transaction-hash)                     |                                         |
| [Query the status endpoint](#querying-the-status-endpoint)                     | <get:/transactionStatus/{hash}>         |
| [Check for confirmation](#checking-for-confirmation)                           | [TransactionStatusEnum](../reference/rest/symbol.md#model-TransactionStatusEnum) |
| [Check for failure](#checking-for-failure)                                     | [TransactionStatusEnum](../reference/rest/symbol.md#model-TransactionStatusEnum) |
| [Handle unknown status](#handling-unknown-status)                              |                                         |
| [Wait between attempts](#waiting-between-attempts)                             |                                         |

> | [Handle timeouts](#handling-timeouts)                                          |                                         |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Step                                                       | Related documentation                                                            |
| ---------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [Query the status endpoint](#querying-the-status-endpoint) | <get:/transactionStatus/{hash}>                                                  |
| [Check for confirmation](#checking-for-confirmation)       | [TransactionStatusEnum](../reference/rest/symbol.md#model-TransactionStatusEnum) |
| [Check for failure](#checking-for-failure)                 | [TransactionStatusEnum](../reference/rest/symbol.md#model-TransactionStatusEnum) |
```

I want these tables to be like a reference sheet for experienced developers. So if they want to know how to check the status, they come here, copy the endpoint and that's it.
So no need to list all the tutorial's sections without any further information. That's the TOC's job :D

Author: Got it 👌

---
title: Transaction Status
---

# Monitoring Transaction Status

After announcing a <transaction:> to the Symbol network, it remains unconfirmed until it is included in a <block:>.

Monitoring status changes is essential for building responsive applications that can react to transaction
confirmation or failure.

This tutorial shows how to monitor a transaction's status as it moves from unconfirmed to confirmed.

> !!! important "Confirmed transactions can still be reversed"

Reviewer: `important` is not a valid admonition type in the Material theme, so it renders as a `note` instead:
https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/admonitions/#supported-types
Maybe we can use `info` here? I feel like a `warning` would be too scary right in the introduction.

    A confirmed transaction has been included in a block but is not yet irreversible.
	The final state is <finalization:>, which occurs only after the block is finalized by the network.

> 	Until then, <rollback:|rollbacks> are still possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	Until then, <rollbacks:> are still possible.
```

The glossary plugin is smart enough to detect English plurals, so you can simplify this link.

## Prerequisites

If you have not done so already, start with the [Hello World](../start/hello-world.md) tutorial to make sure your
development environment is set up correctly.

## Full Code

{% import 'tutorial.jinja2' as tutorial with context %}

{{ tutorial.code_full('devbook/transactions/monitoring-status', ['py', 'js']) }}

> !!! note "Polling vs WebSockets"

Reviewer: This is a good comment. Let's put it before the code.
And make it normal text instead of an info box, to avoid having too many boxes :D

>     This tutorial uses polling to check transaction status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This tutorial uses polling to check the transaction status.
```

    Polling is used here for illustration purposes, but it is not the recommended approach for production applications.

    A production-grade application should use WebSockets to receive status change notifications directly from the <node:>.

>     This provides a more responsive solution without the overhead of repeated API calls.

Reviewer: "Production-grade" is a bit ambiguous... the fact is that websockets are more responsive and efficient, so let's just say that. Something like:

```suggestion
    WebSockets provide a more responsive solution without the overhead of repeated API calls.
```

Author: Applied, updated [transfer.md](https://github.com/symbol/symbol/pull/1737/commits/ed9e362eba358daf9608c7e090f09de66eece299#diff-afc8aada36f2a6c0450ae4fb5796b65ee88c700b9c4e82bdf842cb3dfad86e1e) admonition too.

## Code Explanation

> ### Setting Up the Transaction Hash

Reviewer: This is extremely picky, but when possible, I like that the entries in the TOC fit in one line. For example:

```suggestion
### Finding the Transaction Hash
```

Author: Applied.

thought: what do you think about using bare infinitive instead of gerund for section titles? titles would be shorter, more in line with the conclusion section, and create a stronger sense of action.

Reviewer: Hmmmm... I've tried it, and it sounds a bit too bossy for my taste. It reads like we are giving commands to the reader.
I prefer a more humble approach, where we just describe what we are doing, and the reader decides if he does the same or not.
So we stick with gerunds!

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:13:16', 'js:9:10']) }}

To monitor a transaction, you need its hash, which is generated after signing.
The hash uniquely identifies the transaction on the Symbol network.

> For this tutorial, we use a sample transaction hash to demonstrate the monitoring.

Reviewer: We never talk about ourselves in the docs, so no "we", "us" or "our". You can use passive voice if needed, but in this case it's simpler to just say:

```suggestion
This tutorial uses a sample transaction hash to demonstrate the monitoring.
```

In a real application, you would obtain this hash immediately after signing a transaction and use it to track its

> status:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
status.
```

> 

Reviewer: You also need to mention that the tutorial allows you to provide your own hash via the `TRANSACTION_HASH` environment variable.
It will be obvious to most people, sure, but it looks like we forgot about it if we don't mention it.

??? example "Example: Getting the transaction hash"

    === "Python"
        ```python
        --8<-- 'devbook/transactions/getting-transaction-hash.py'
        ```

    === "JavaScript"
        ```javascript
        --8<-- 'devbook/transactions/getting-transaction-hash.mjs'

>         ```

Reviewer: I think you only need the last sentence ("See the Transfer tutorial..."). Adding the info box with a snippet here is a bit too much, and it means more code that we need to maintain. You can remove the box entirely (and the source files).

>     See the [Transfer](transfer.md) tutorial for a complete example of creating, signing, and announcing transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Transfer](./transfer.md) tutorial shows how to obtain a transaction's hash after signing it.
```

> ### The Monitoring Function

Reviewer: There is no need for a section about the function. The code gets repeated too much then, and the actual useful snippets get buried in a level-4 header that does not show in the TOC.

Move the explanation of the loop to the section about "Querying the status", promote all subsections to level-3 headers, and remove this section.

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:21:82', 'js:14:98']) }}

The `wait_for_transaction_confirmation` function is the core of this tutorial.
It monitors a transaction until it is confirmed or fails.

It uses a `for` loop to check the transaction status up to 60 times by default (2 minutes with 2-second intervals
between attempts).
This loop structure ensures that monitoring will eventually stop, even if the transaction never confirms.

Let's break down how this function works:

#### Querying the Status Endpoint

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:35:56', 'js:28:57']) }}

> On each attempt, the function queries the <get:/transactionStatus/{hash}> endpoint, which returns real-time information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On each attempt, the function queries the <get:/transactionStatus/{hash}> endpoint, which returns information
```

about the transaction's current state.

The response includes:

* **Group:** The transaction's current status group. Possible values:
    * `unconfirmed`: The transaction is in the unconfirmed pool waiting to be included in a block.
    * `confirmed`: The transaction has been included in a block.
    * `failed`: The transaction failed validation and was rejected.
    * `partial`: For <bonded aggregate transaction:|bonded aggregate transactions> waiting

> 		for <cosignature:|cosignatures>.

Reviewer: I believe it looks nicer as a table. For tables I disregard the 120-column limit.
```suggestion

    | Group         | Meaning                                                                          |
    | ------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
    | `unconfirmed` | The transaction is in the <unconfirmed pool:> waiting to be included in a block. |
    | `confirmed`   | The transaction has been included in a block.                                    |
    | `failed`      | The transaction failed validation and has been rejected.                         |
    | `partial`     | For <bonded aggregate transactions:> waiting for <cosignatures:>.                |

```

#### Checking for Failure

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:63:66', 'js:65:71']) }}

If the transaction status group is `failed`, the function raises an error with the status code.

Common reasons include insufficient balance, invalid <signature:|signatures>, or deadline expiration.
Failed transactions are rejected during validation and will not be included in a block.

See [TransactionStatusEnum](../reference/rest/symbol.md#model-TransactionStatusEnum) for all possible codes.

#### Handling Unknown Status

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:68:75', 'js:73:82']) }}

If the endpoint returns HTTP 404, the transaction status is not yet available.
This can happen immediately after announcing a transaction, before the <node:> processes it, or if the hash is invalid.

The function handles this case by logging the attempt and continuing to poll.

#### Waiting Between Attempts

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:77:79', 'js:84:89']) }}

Between polling attempts, the function waits for a configurable delay (default: 2 seconds).
This prevents overwhelming the <node:> with requests and allows time for network processing.

#### Handling Timeouts

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:81:82', 'js:92:97']) }}

> If the transaction doesn't confirm after all attempts, the function raises a `RuntimeError`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the transaction is not confirmed after the specified attempts, the function raises a `RuntimeError` explaining the problem.
```

```

The output shows:

1. The transaction hash being monitored.
2. Multiple polling attempts showing the transaction status, code, hash, and deadline.
3. The status changing from `unconfirmed` to `confirmed` between attempts.
4. A success message when the transaction is confirmed.

The number of attempts and timing vary depending on network conditions and block production rate.
On the Symbol network, blocks are typically produced every 30 seconds, so you may see several `unconfirmed` status
responses before the transaction is confirmed.

Once confirmed, you can get additional details such as the block height where the transaction was included by querying
<get:/transactions/confirmed/{transactionId}> with the transaction hash.

To see the transaction from the network's perspective, visit the
[Symbol Testnet Explorer](https://testnet.symbol.fyi/) and search for the transaction hash.

## Conclusion

This tutorial showed how to:

| Step                                                                           | Related documentation                   |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------- |

> | [Set up the transaction hash](#setting-up-the-transaction-hash)                | <dy:SymbolFacade.signTransaction><br><dy:SymbolTransactionFactory.attachSignature> |

Reviewer: The tutorial no longer uses these methods, better remove this row.

| [Query the status endpoint](#querying-the-status-endpoint)                     | <get:/transactionStatus/{hash}> |
| [Check for confirmation and failure](#checking-for-confirmation)               | [TransactionStatusEnum](../reference/rest/symbol.md#model-TransactionStatusEnum) |

> | [Query block height](#output)                                                  | <get:/transactions/confirmed/{transactionId}> |

Reviewer: Yeah, this has been hinted, but not really explained. Better remove this row too.
